.Dd 16 June 2012
.Dt TGL 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tgl
.Nd Run the Text Generation Language interpreter
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl h
.Op Fl p
.Op Fl c Ar context
.Op Fl l Ar library
.Op Fl r Ar file
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Runs the Text Generation Language interpreter on the script read from standard
input.
.Pp
tgl supports the following options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h
Show usage and exit.
.It Fl p
Search for prefix payload data.
.It Fl c Ar context
Specify the current context (for conditional execution).
.It Fl l Ar library
Use the file specified by
.Ar library
(instead of ~/.tgl) for the user library.
.It Fl r Ar file
Use
.Ar file
(instead of ~/.tgl_registers) for register persistence.
.El
.Pp
When Tgl starts up, it first restores registers from the register persistence
file (by default, ~/.tgl_registers), then executes the user library if it
exists (by default, ~/.tgl). Any errors in either of these steps are reported
but otherwise ignored.
.Pp
The script to execute is then read from standard input, until EOF is
reached. The script is then executed; if any error occurs, execution is
aborted. If no errors are encountered, the final state of the registers is
written back to the register persistence file.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
exits with status 0 on success. An exit status of 1 indicates failure due
to an error in the input program. Stati 253--255 indicate failures due to
external conditions.
.Sh BASIC CONCEPTS
.Ss VALUES
Every value in Tgl is a string. A string is simply a sequence of arbitrary
8-bit bytes of arbitrary length. Some commands will interpret the strings as
integers or booleans. An integer is a string beginning with a
.Qq +
or
.Qq - ,
followed by any number of base-10 digits. Base-16 (hexadecimal) may be
specified by prefixing the digits with
.Qq 0x ,
base-8 (octal) by
.Qq 0o ,
or base-2 (binary) by
.Qq 0b .
A boolean string is false if it is the empty string or if it is a valid
representation of numeric zero. Any other string is considered true.
.Ss STACK
The stack is the primary method of passing data to and from commands. With few
exceptions, all commands only pop values from and push values to the top of the
stack. There is no limit on stack height, other than available memory. It is an
error to try to pop from the stack when it is empty.
.Ss REGISTERS
Tgl provides the programmer with exactly 256 registers, each corresponding to a
single byte value. Each register contains one string, and also stores its time
of last access. Other than the history system, commands do not use registers
except when doing so to present functionality to the user.
.Pp
Registers are all initialised to empty strings. When Tgl exits successfully, it
will write the state of all registers to the register persistence file. This
file is read back in the next time Tgl runs, so registers will preserve their
values across invocations of Tgl.
.Pp
Registers 0x00..0x1F (ie, the byte values) are used to store command history,
where register 0 is the most recently run command sequence. When TGL runs
successfully and history was not suppressed, and the command sequence was not
\(dqhX\(dq, the command sequence is added to the history by moving 0x00..0x1E
each one register up, then inserted to register 0x00.
.Ss SECONDARY ARGUMENTS
Some commands take optional parameters via a secondary argument system. There
are four secondary argument slots, called U0..U3. Unlike registers, they cannot
be accessed directly, and may be null. Any command which takes secondary
arguments nullifies all four slots after execution. There is also the secondary
index, UX, which indicates which slot is used next. It starts at zero, and is
incremented whenever a secondary argument is set. It is zeroed when a
secondary-argument-using command completes execution.
.Pp
A secondary argument is considered
.Qq set
when UX has advanced beyond its own index. It is considered
.Qq provided
when it is set and non-null.
.Pp
Commands which use secondary arguments indicate such usage similar to the
example below:
.Dl Secondary: [value = default] [provided] (set?)
.Pp
Brackets indicate that the argument is considered if provided; parantheses, if
set. Items of the format value=default indicate a property which has the given
default if the argument is not provided, but which takes the value of any
argument which is provided. Items of the format property? indicate booleans
which are false unless the argument is provided or set (depending on whether
brackets or parentheses are used), regardless of the argument's value. Any
argument not noted is silently ignored.
.Pp
The
.Li u
(secondary-argument) command is used to set secondary arguments. What it
does depends on the following character:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It %
Pop a value from the main stack and use it to provide the next argument
.It space
Set the next argument to null
.It digit
Evaluate the following digits (using the number command) and use the result to
provide the next argument
.It "- +"
Same as digit
.It .
Provides an integer corresponding to the current stack height as the next
argument.
.It other
Create a one-character string with the given character and use it to provide
the next argument
.El
.Ss PAYLOAD DATA
In some cases, it is desirable to take data from a structured source, either
embedded in the script itself, or extracted from an external source. The
.Li ,
command provides functionality to access and manipulate this payload data.
.Pp
Most commonly, one includes payload data within the script itself. Usually,
payload data starts after the text
.Qq ",$" ,
though the delimiter can be changed. By passing the
.Li -p
(or
.Li --prefix-payload )
flag, it is also possible to include a payload at the beginning of input. In
this case, code is considered to start after the first
.Qq "|"
(though initial whitespace (for the
.Li "`"
character within strings) still counts within the payload). Multiple pipes can
be used to include the
.Qq "|"
within the payload; the first occurance that has the greatest number of
pipes is used to separate the payload and the code.
.Pp
The first occurrance of a payload-data command which requires access to the
payload will search for the start-of-payload delimiter (default
.Qq ",$" )
in the code if no payload is already present.
.Ss COMMANDS
All
.Qq true commands
in TGL are represented by a single character. Whenever the interpreter must
execute a command, it looks at the character at the interpreter's current
instruction pointer, and runs the associated command. All whitespace characters
are implicitly considered no-op commands. If the command completes
successfully, the instruction pointer is incremented.
.Pp
Builtin commands have access to all interpreter state, including the code and
instruction pointer itself. Many commands will move the instruction pointer to
effect control and quoting mechanisms. See the description for each command.
.Ss CONTEXT
TGL is run with a context (the empty string if not given) and maintains whether
the context is active. The context is typically specified as a filename. Some
commands only have effect if the context is active, allowing for language- or
project-specific functionality.
.Sh CATEGORICAL COMMAND REFERENCE
.Ss STACK
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It x (swap: a{depth} b -> b a{depth}, or b a{-depth} -> a{-depth} b)
.Dl Secondary: [depth = 1]
The top two items on the stack are swapped. With a secondary argument, this
rolls the top element under that many items if positive, or moves an item at
that depth to the top if negative.
.It ":" (dupe: item -> item{times+1})
.Dl Secondary: [times = 1]
Pops an item from the stack, then pushes (times+1) copies of it onto the stack.
.It ";" (drop: item{times} -> ())
.Dl Secondary: [times = 1]
Pops (times) items from the stack and discards them.
.El
.Ss STRINGS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It c (concat: a b -> ab)
Pops two strings from the stack, concatenates them, and pushes the result.
.It C (char-at: string index -> char)
Pops a string and an index, and pushes the character within the string at that
index. The first character is at index 0. Negative indices are relative to the
end of the string.
.It l (length: string -> length)
Pops a string from the stack and pushes its length, in bytes.
.It m (map: string {from to}{n} n -> result, or string ... -> result)
.Dl Secondary: [stack-position-of-string = null]
Translates each occurrance of
.Ar from
to the corresponding
.Ar to
in
.Ar string
such that no mappings interact. The number of mappings must be specified
explicitly on the stack if no secondary argument is given; if one is given, it
should be a
.Li \(dqu.\(dq
command after
.Ar string
but before the first mapping.
.It s (substr: string from to -> length)
Pops a string and two indices, evaluated the same was as in char-at, and pushes
the portion of the string between
.Ar from ,
inclusive, to
.Ar to ,
exclusive.
.It S (suffix: string from -> length)
Same as substr, but assumes that
.Ar to
is the length of the string.
.It y (empty-string: () -> \(dq\(dq)
Pushes the empty string onto the stack.
.It \(dq ... \(dq (string: ??? -> string)
Pushes the characters between the double-quotes as a string onto the stack. The
following characters are interpreted specially:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It \e
Evaluates the
.Li \e
command at that point and splices the result into the string. Characters
continue to be read after the point where
.Li \e
left off.
.It "$"
Interprets the following character as a register name; the value of this
register is spliced into the string at that point.
.It "%"
Pops a value from the stack and splices it into the string at that point.
.It "`"
Inserts the string of whitespace characters that were present before the first
non-whitespace character in the primary input.
.El
.It "'" C (char: () -> string)
Pushes a single-character string, whose contents is the character following the
command, to the stack. Note that since TGL is not Unicode-aware, this more
strictly pushes a single
.Em byte .
For example, the code
.Dl "'ß"
will not push a string containing an Eszett, but rather (assuming UTF-8) a
string containing the byte 0xC3; the interpreter will then try to execute
command 0x9F.
.It "(" ... ")" (code: () -> string)
Pushes the string between the parentheses verbatim. The parentheses must be
balanced; for example, the code
.Dl "(foo (bar) baz)"
pushes the string
.Dl "foo (bar) baz"
.It "." (print: string -> ())
Pops a string from the stack and writes it verbatim to standard output.
.It \e (escape: () -> string or () -> ())
Pushes a single character as indicated by the following character(s).
.Pp
Control characters:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It \ea
BEL
.It \eb
BS
.It \ee
ESC
.It \ef
FF
.It \en
LF
.It \er
CR
.It \et
HT
.It \ev
VT
.It \ex##
The byte represented by the hexadecimal integer
.Ar ## .
.El
.Pp
The following result in the character being escaped:
.Dl \e\(dq \e\e \e$ \e% \e` \e'
.Pp
The following result in nothing (not even a string is pushed); they may be used
for manual balancing of parentheses as required by some commands.
.Dl \e( \e) \e[ \e] \e{ \e} \e< \e>
.It "=" (equal: a b -> (a==b))
Pops two strings and pushes a boolean indicating whether they are exactly
equal.
.It "!" (not-equal: a b -> (a!=b))
Pops two strings and pushes a boolean indicating whether they are
.Em not
exactly equal.
.It "{" (string-less: a b -> (a<b))
Pops two strings and pushes a boolean indicating whether the left is less than
(ASCIIbetically) the right.
.It "}" (string-greater: a b -> (a>b))
Pops two strings and pushes a boolean indicating whether the left is greater
than (ASCIIbetically) the right.
.El
.Ss MATH
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It "#/digit" ... (number: () -> integer)
Reads an integer and pushes it onto the stack, stopping on the first
non-digit. Any digit (0..9) is bound to this command; the # command also allows
a leading sign before the number itself.
.It ? (rand: () -> integer)
Pushes a random integer between 0 and 65535, inclusive, onto the stack.
.It "+" (add: a b -> (a+b))
Pops two stack elements, interprets them as integers, and pushes their sum
onto the stack.
.It "-" (sub: a b -> (a-b))
Pops two stack elements, interprets them as integers, and pushes their
difference onto the stack.
.It "*" (mul: a b -> (a*b))
Pops two stack elements, interprets them as integers, and pushes their product
onto the stack.
.It "/" (div: a b -> (a/b))
Pops two stack elements, interprets them as integers, and pushes their quotient
onto the stack.
.It "%" (mod: a b -> (a%b))
Pops two stack elements, interprets them as integers, and pushes their
remainder onto the stack.
.It "<" (less: a b -> (a<b))
Pops two integers and pushes a boolean indicating whether the left is less than
the right.
.It ">" (greater: a b -> (a>b))
Pops two integers and pushes a boolean indicating whether the left is greater
than the left.
.It "&" (and: a b -> (a&&b))
Pops two booleans and pushes the result of logical AND. Note that due to the
nature of TGL this is not, and cannot be, short-circuiting.
.It "|" (or: a b -> (a||b))
Pops two booleans and pushes the result of logical OR. Note that due to the
nature of TGL this is not, and cannot be, short-circuiting.
.It "^" (xor: a b -> (a^b))
Pops two booleans and pushes the result of logical XOR.
.It "~" (not: a -> !a)
Pops a boolean and pushes its negation.
.El
.Ss REGISTERS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It a (auto-write: value -> ())
Pops a string and stores it into a register with an alphanumeric name. The
register chosen is the one with the earliest date of last use. After writing
the register, prints a string of the format
.Dl "`%s: %c\en"
indicating the value stored and the register it was stored in. (The first
character is a literal grave quote, while the last one is a linefeed.)
.It p (stash: () -> ())
Pushes all registers onto a stack independent of the primary stack.
.It P (retrieve: () -> ())
Restores all registers as preserved by stash, removing that entry.
.It r R (read: () -> value)
Pushes the contents of register
.Ar R
onto the stack.
.It R R (write: value -> ())
Pops
.Ar value
from the stack and stores it into register
.Ar R .
.It u X (secondary-argument: () -> () or value -> ())
The effect of this command depends on
.Ar X .
See SECONDARY ARGUMENTS above.
.It z (stash-retrieve: code -> guarded-code)
Pops
.Ar code
and places
.Li p...P
guards around it, so that no changes to registers occur due to execution of
.Ar code
(assuming it contains no \(dq,$\(dq).
.El
.Ss PAYLOAD
All payload commands are prefixed with \(dq,\(dq.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It ",$" (payload-start: () -> ())
Immediately moves the instruction pointer to the end of the current code,
effectively stopping processing.
.It ",c" (payload-curr: () -> elt)
Pushes the string corresponding to the first element of the current payload
data onto the stack.
.It ",," (payload-next: () -> ())
.Dl Secondary: [count = 1]
Deletes the first
.Ar count
elements from the current payload data.
.It ",;" (payload-next-kv: () -> ())
.Dl Secondary: [count = 1]
Deletes the first
.Ar count
pairs of elements from the current payload data.
.It ",." (payload-print: () -> ())
.Dl Secondary: [count = 1]
Prints the first
.Ar count
elements of the payload data, separated by the current
.Ar output-v-delimiter ,
then deletes them. A
.Ar count
of zero indicates all elements.
.It ",:" (payload-print-kv: () -> ())
.Dl Secondary: [count = 1]
Prints the first
.Ar count
key-value pairs of the payload data. Each key and value is separated by the
current
.Ar output-kv-delimiter ,
and each pair is separated by the current
.Ar output-kvs-delimiter .
A
.Ar count
of zero indicates all pairs.
.It ",r" (payload-read: () -> payload)
Pushes the string representation of the current payload data onto the stack.
.It ",R" (payload-write: payload -> ())
Sets the current payload data to the string popped from the stack.
.It ",h" (payload-length-bytes: () -> byte-count)
Pushes an integer indicating how many bytes remain in the current payload
data. Returns zero if and only if no elements remain in the current
payload. (Thus the mnemonic
.Em Has-more )
.It ",e" (payload-each: ??? body -> ???)
.Dl Secondary: [reg = \(dqp\(dq]
For each value in the current payload, set
.Ar reg
to that value and execute
.Ar body .
This does not modify the current payload data. The result of the payload data
having been altered after
.Ar body
exits is undefined.
.It ",E" (payload-each-kv: ??? body -> ???)
.Dl Secondary: [key-reg = \(dqk\(dq] [val-reg = \(dqv\(dq]
For each key-value pair in the current payload, set
.Ar key-reg
to the key and
.Ar val-reg
to the value, then execute
.Ar body .
This does not modify the current payload data. The result of the payload data
having been altered after
.Ar body
exits is undefined.
.It ",i" (payload-datum-at-index: index -> value)
Pushes the payload element at
.Ar index ,
where 0 is the index of the first element. This operation requires a linear
scan of the payload data.
.It ",I" (payload-num-indices: () -> count)
Counts the number of elements in the current payload data and pushes the
result. This operation requires a linear scan of the payload data.
.It ",k" (payload-datum-at-key: key -> value)
Pushes the first payload value element which follows the given key. This
opretation requires a linear scan of the payload data.
.It ",/" VV (payload-set-property: value -> ())
Sets the property
.Ar VV
to
.Ar value .
Properties are:
.Bl -hang -width Ds
.It ps (payload-start, default \(dq,$\(dq)
The delimiter that separates code from payload in the main body.
.It vd (value-delimiter, default \(dqws\(dq (see \(dq,s\(dq))
The delimiter that separates elements in the payload data.
.It ov (output-v-delimiter, default \(dq, \(dq)
The string to separate contiguous normal values on output.
.It ok (output-kv-delimiter, default \(dq, \(dq)
The string to separate keys from values on output.
.It os (output-kvs-delimiter, default \(dq\en\(dq)
The string to separate key-value pairs on output.
.It b( b[ b{ b< (balance-paren)
Set to any boolean. If true, delimiters are ignored when between yet-unbalanced
pairs of the given type of parenthesis character. If false, the characters are
treated normally. Default is true for ([{, false for <.
.It t( t[ t{ t< (trim-paren)
Set to any boolean. If true, up to one single matching pair of the given
parenthesis type is trimmed from a value before extraction. This is performed
after whitespace trimming, and no further trimming is done after this
step. Default is true for ([{, false for <.
.It ts (trim-space, default true)
Set to any boolean. If true, extraneous spaces around values are trimmed when
being extracted.
.El
.It ",?" VV (payload-get-property: () -> value)
Pushes the current value of property
.Ar VV .
See \(dq,/\(dq.
.It ",s" (payload-space-delimited: () -> ())
Sets payload to be delimited by whitespace of any kind, combination, and
abount. Resets balance and trim properties to defaults. If this mode is in use
when payload is first extracted (or with any command which alters the payload),
leading space in the payload is skipped. This is indicated in delimiter
properties with the special string \(dqws\(dq.
.It ",0" (payload-nul-delimited: () -> ())
Sets payload to be delimited by NUL characters, and sets all balance and trim
properties to false.
.It ",l" (payload-line-delimited: () -> ())
Sets the following strings:
.Dl \(dq\en\(dq \(dq\er\(dq \(dq\er\en\(dq
as the value delimiter, and sets all paren-related balancing and trimming to
false. Space trimming is set to true.
.It ",!" (payload-from-code: () -> ())
Extracts the payload from the suffix from the top-level primary code, using the
current
.Ar payload-start
delimiter. This is automatically done if no payload has ever been extracted
when a command that accesses the payload data is run.
.It ",f" (payload-from-file: filename -> ())
Reads the entire contents of
.Ar filename
and uses it as payload data.
.It ",F" (payload-from-glob: glob -> ())
Accumulates all filenames matching
.Ar glob
and stores them into the payload data, NUL-delimited. Implicitly executes
\(dq,0\(dq after.
.El
.Ss CONTROL STRUCTURES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It d (defun: name body -> ())
Defines the command of the given name, which may be standard (one character
long) or long (more than one character long). It is an error if it already
exists. After execution of this command, the new command can be invoked in the
normal manner (directly if a standard name, or with
.Li Q...
if it is long).
.It D (defun-contextual: name body -> ())
Like
.Li defun
except that nothing happens if the current context is not active.
.It e (each: ??? string body -> ???)
.Dl Secondary: [reg = \(dqc\(dq]
For each character in
.Ar string ,
set
.Ar reg
to a string with that character as its only content, then execute
.Ar body .
.It f (for: ??? to body -> ???)
.Dl Secondary: [from = 0] [reg = \(dqi\(dq] [increment = +1 or -1]
Set
.Ar reg
to
.Ar from .
Execute
.Ar body ,
then add
.Ar increment
to
.Ar reg .
If
.Ar reg
has not moved to the other side of
.Ar to
from whence it started and is not equal to
.Ar to ,
the command repeats. If
.Ar increment
is not given, it defaults to +1 if
.Ar to
is greater than
.Ar from ,
or -1 otherwise.
.It i (if: ??? condition then else -> ???)
If
.Ar condition
is a true boolean, executes
.Ar then ;
otherwise, executes
.Ar else .
Other than the three arguments given, the effect on the interpreter is entirely
dependent on the code executed. Note:
.Ar condition
is a
.Em value ,
not code to execute. The code
.Dl "(1 2=)('y)('n)i."
will print
.Li \(dqy\(dq
since
.Li \(dq1 2=\(dq
is a true string. For the desired effect, the code should read
.Dl "1 2=('y)('n)i."
.It I (if-short: ??? condition then -> ???)
The same as
.Li if
except that it does nothing if
.Ar condition
is false.
.It Q ... (long-command: ??? -> ???)
Reads characters from the code until end of input or whitespace is
encountered. These characters (excluding the leading
.Qq Q )
constitute a long command name. The command corresponding to this name is
executed. The way the interpreter is affected depends entirely on what the
command does.
.It v (save-code: name code -> ())
Creates a defun using the given name and code, executes it (the defun, not the
code), and appends the definition to the user library if successful.
.It V t (save-code-contextual: name code -> ())
Like save-code, but also restricts the definition to the context indicated by
.Ar t .
If
.Ar t
is \(dqs\(dq, the whole context must match; if it is \(dqe\(dq, only the
extension must match. No other values of
.Ar t
are permitted.
.It w (while: ??? condition body -> ???)
Executes
.Ar condition
and pops a value from the stack. If it is false, the command stops. Otherwise,
.Ar body
is executed and the command repeats. Notice that unlike
.Li if ,
.Ar condition
is code to evaluate on each iteration, instead of a value by itself.
.It W (while-short: ??? body -> ???)
Executes
.Ar code
and pops a value from the stack. If it is true, the command repeats.
.It X (eval: ??? code -> ???)
Pops a string from the stack and evaluates it as TGL code. The way the
interpreter is affected depends entirely on what the code does.
.El
.Ss CONTEXT
All context commands are prefixed with
.Li "@" .
Any occurrance of
.Qq ...
in these commands indicates that a string is read until the next whitespace
character. The string
.Qq matches
if the glob defined by the string which was read (see fnmatch(3)) matches the
current context (as with
.Fl c
).
.Bl -tag -width ds
.It "@=" ... (context-set: () -> ())
The context is made active if matches, inactive if does not match.
.It "@!" ... (context-set-not: () -> ())
The context is made inactive if matches, active if does not match.
.It "@&" ... (context-and: () -> ())
The context is made inactive if does not match.
.It "@|" ... (context-or: () -> ())
The context is made active if matches.
.It "@^" ... (context-and-not: () -> ())
The context is made inactive if matches.
.It "@|" ... (context-or-not: () -> ())
The context is made active if does not match.
.It "@?" (context-active: () -> active-state)
Pushes a boolean indicating whether the context is active.
.It "@s" (context-query: () -> context)
Pushes the current context itself.
.It "@e" (context-extension: () -> extension)
Pushes the filename extension of the context, including the leading dot, if
present; otherwise, an empty string.
.El
.Ss HISTORY/LIBRARY
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It h (history-access: () -> entry)
.Dl Secondary: [off = 0]
Accesses the item in history at (off+implicit).
.Ar implicit
begins at 0 and is incremented every time history-access is invoked.
.It H (suppress-history: () -> ())
Prevents the current code from being added to the history.
.El
.Ss EXTERNAL COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It b (shell-script: input script -> output)
.Dl Secondary: [status-reg = null]
Executes \(dq\
.Ar $SHELL
-c
.Ar script \(dq
using
.Ar input
as its standard input. Output is accumulated and pushed onto the stack when the
command completes. If
.Ar status-reg
is specified, the exit code of the child process is stored as an integer to
that register. Otherwise, it is an error if the child exits with a non-zero
status. In any case, an abnormally terminated process (eg, one that was killed)
results in an error.
.It B (shell-command: input args{n} n -> output, or input ... -> output)
.Dl Secondary: [stack-depth-of-input = null] [status-reg = null]
Execute the given shell command, the arguments pushed in the order they will be
used. The first argument is the command to run. No additional processing is
performed on the arguments given: They are passed to the program verbatim (this
means, for example, that no quoting is necessary). Example:
.Dl yu.\(dqecho\(dq \(dqhello\(dq \(dqworld\(dqB.  --> hello world
Standard input is provided by
.Ar input ;
standard output is accumulated into
.Ar output
and pushed when the command completes. If
.Ar status-reg
is specified, the exit code of the child process is stored as an integer to
that register. Otherwise, it is an error if the child exits with a non-zero
status. In any case, an abnormally terminated process (eg, one that was killed)
results in an error.
.It j ... (sed: input -> output, or input script -> output)
Executes \(dqsed -r\(dq on the given input, pushing the output onto the
stack. The script is normally read in after the command name itself, and
follows this pseudo-extended-regex:
.Dl (${STATEMENT};\es*)*${STATEMENT}
where
.Dl ${STATEMENT} = [a-zA-Z](.)[^\e1]*\e1[^\e1]*\e1[a-zA-Z]*
If no script follows the command, it is instead popped from the stack. The
environment variable
.Ar TGL_SED
can be used to override the name of the sed command.
.It J (perl: input script -> output)
INvokes \(dqperl -E\(dq with the given script and standard input. The
environment variable
.Ar TGL_PERL
can be set to override the location of the perl executable.
.It t (tcl: input script -> output)
Invokes \(dqtclsh\(dq with the given input and script, and pushes the output
onto the stack. The executable name can be overridden with the environment
variable
.Ar TGL_TCL .
.El
.Sh COMMAND INDEX
.Ss BY INVOCATION
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It a
auto-write
.It b
shell-script
.It B
shell-command
.It c
concat
.It C
char-at
.It d
defun
.It D
defun-contextual
.It e
each
.It f
for
.It h
history-access
.It H
suppress-history
.It i
if
.It I
if-short
.It j
sed
.It J
perl
.It l
length
.It m
map
.It Q
long-command
.It p
stash
.It P
retrieve
.It r
read
.It R
write
.It s
substr
.It S
suffix
.It t
tcl
.It u
secondary-argument
.It v
save-code
.It V
save-code-contextual
.It w
while
.It W
while-short
.It x
swap
.It X
eval
.It y
empty-string
.It z
stash-retrieve
.It "!"
not-equal
.It \(dq
string
.It "#"
number
.It "%"
mod
.It "&"
and
.It "'"
char
.It "("
code
.It "*"
mul
.It "+"
add
.It ",0"
payload-nul-delimited
.It ",c"
payload-curr
.It ",e"
payload-each
.It ",E"
payload-each-kv
.It ",f"
payload-from-file
.It ",F"
payload-from-glob
.It ",h"
payload-length-bytes
.It ",i"
payload-datum-at-index
.It ",k"
payload-datum-at-key
.It ",l"
payload-line-delimited
.It ",l"
payload-num-indices
.It ",r"
payload-read
.It ",R"
payload-write
.It ",s"
payload-space-delimited
.It ",!"
payload-from-code
.It ",$"
payload-start
.It ",,"
payload-next
.It ",."
payload-print
.It ",/"
payload-set-property
.It ",:"
payload-print-kv
.It ",;"
payload-next-kv
.It ",?"
payload-get-property
.It "-"
sub
.It "."
print
.It "/"
div
.It digit
number
.It ":"
dupe
.It ";"
drop
.It "<"
less
.It "="
equal
.It ">"
greater
.It ?
rand
.It "@="
context-set
.It "@!"
context-set-not
.It "@&"
context-and
.It "@|"
context-or
.It "@^"
context-and-not
.It "@v"
context-or-not
.It "@?"
context-active
.It "@s"
context-query
.It "@e"
context-extension
.It \e
escape
.It "^"
xor
.It "{"
string-less
.It "|"
or
.It "}"
string-greater
.It "~"
not
.El
.Ss BY NAME
.Bl -hang -width "loooooooooooooooooooooooooong"
.It add
.Li "+"
.It and
.Li "&"
.It auto-write
.Li a
.It char
.Li "'"
.It char-at
.Li C
.It code
.Li "("
.It concat
.Li c
.It context-active
.Li "@?"
.It context-and
.Li "@&"
.It context-and-not
.Li "@^"
.It context-extension
.Li "@e"
.It context-or
.Li "@|"
.It context-or-not
.Li "@v"
.It context-query
.Li "@s"
.It context-set
.Li "@="
.It context-set-not
.Li "@!"
.It defun
.Li d
.It defun-contextual
.Li D
.It div
.Li "/"
.It drop
.Li ";"
.It dupe
.Li ":"
.It each
.Li e
.It escape
.Li \e
.It for
.Li f
.It empty-string
.Li y
.It equal
.Li "!"
.It eval
.Li X
.It greater
.Li ">"
.It history
.Li h
.It if
.Li i
.It if-short
.Li I
.It length
.Li l
.It less
.Li "<"
.It long-command
.Li Q
.It map
.Li m
.It mul
.Li "*"
.It not
.Li "~"
.It not-equal
.Li "!"
.It number
.Li Any of: "#0123456789"
.It or
.Li "|"
.It payload-curr
.Li ",c"
.It payload-datum-at-index
.Li ",i"
.It payload-datum-at-key
.Li ",k"
.It payload-each
.Li ",e"
.It payload-each-kv
.Li ",E"
.It payload-from-code
.Li ",!"
.It payload-from-file
.Li ",f"
.It payload-from-glob
.Li ",F"
.It payload-get-property
.Li ",?"
.It payload-length-bytes
.Li ",h"
.It payload-line-delimited
.Li ",l"
.It payload-next
.Li ",,"
.It payload-next-kv
.Li ",;"
.It payload-nul-delimited
.Li ",0"
.It payload-num-indices
.Li ",I"
.It payload-print
.Li ",."
.It payload-print-kv
.Li ",:"
.It payload-read
.Li ",r"
.It payload-set-property
.Li ",/"
.It payload-space-delimited
.Li ",s"
.It payload-start
.Li ",$"
.It payload-write
.Li ",R"
.It perl
.Li J
.It print
.Li "."
.It rand
.Li ?
.It read
.Li r
.It retrieve
.Li P
.It save-code
.Li v
.It save-code-contextual
.Li V
.It secondary-argument
.Li u
.It sed
.Li j
.It shell-command
.Li B
.It shell-script
.Li b
.It stash
.Li p
.It stash-retrieve
.Li z
.It string
.Li \(dq
.It string-greater
.Li "}"
.It string-less
.Li "{"
.It sub
.Li "-"
.It substr
.Li s
.It suffix
.Li S
.It suppress-history
.Li H
.It swap
.Li x
.It tcl
.Li t
.It while
.Li w
.It while-short
.Li W
.It write
.Li R
.It xor
.Li "^"
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It SHELL
The command to use to run shell commands.
.It TGL_SED
The command to use instead of
.Qq sed
for the
.Li sed
builtin.
.It TGL_PERL
The command to use instead of
.Qq perl
for the
.Li perl
builtin.
.It TGL_TCL
The command to use instead of
.Qq tclsh
for the
.Li tcl
builtin.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It "~/.tgl"
The default location of the user library. This is a TGL script which is
automatically read when TGL starts, and any commands affecting the library
write to it. It can be overridden with the
.Li -l
parameter.
.It "~/.tgl_registers"
The default location of the register persistence file. This is a binary file
used to save and restore registers between invocations of TGL.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss HELLO WORLD
.Bd -literal
  \(dqHello, world!\(dq.
.Ed
.Ss 99 BOTTLES OF BEER
.Bd -literal
  99Rc\(dqbottles\(dqRBrcRC(rc#-1>)(
  \(dq$C $B of beer on the wall\en$C $B of beer\en\(dq.
  rc1-Rc
  rc1=(\(dqbottle\(dq)(\(dqbottles\(dq)iRBrc0=(\(dqNo more\(dq)(rc)iRC
  rc#-1=(
    \(dqGo to the store, buy some more\en99 bottles of beer on the wall\en\(dq
  )(
    \(dqTake one down, pass it around\en$C $B of beer on the wall\en\(dq
  )i.)w
.Ed
.Ss CASE STATEMENTS, HISTORY
Quickly generate case statements for each digit:
.Dl  10(\(dq`case '$i':\en\(dq.)f
.Pp
Save the previous to a language-specific macro:
.Dl  \(dqnc\(dqhzVe
.Pp
Resusing the new macro:
.Dl  Qnc
.Ss CONTEXT
Creating a macro to place strings into C-strings (quoting and escaping):
.Bd -literal
  @=*.h @|*.c
  \(dqcq\(dq (u.\e\e(\e\e)\en(\en)\er(\er)\et(\et)\e\(dq(\e\(dq)\ee(\ee)\ef(\ef)\ev(\ev)m\(dq\e\(dq%\e\(dq\(dq) D
.Ed
